        CCMCHEAT.TOS
        ------------

The program 'ccmcheat.tos' is for use 
with CARRIER COMMAND version 1.01, but
should work with other versions.

The cheat programs are written
entirely in assembly language, and run
on all Atari ST computers. They have 
been written in such a way that they do 
not alter your original game disk, so
you don't need to worry that is is 
being messed around with by an unknown 
hand.

It has been designed to allow you as
much flexiblity as possible in making
your choices as to what features to
have active. The 'user interface' has
been designed to be simple functional
as well as being consistent from
program to program.

Any feature can be switched on or off 
by pressing the appropriate function key.
Pressing the escape key exits back to the
desktop, and pressing the F10 key once
your game disk has been put in the disk
drive will run the game.

The wide number of possibilities for 
ccmcheat.tos does initially present 
a fairly formidable choice. By careful 
choice of certain options game can be 
transformed. For example, by chosing F1
- instantaneous carrier movement - you 
can go and help an island under attack 
and launch a decisive attack on the 
enemy carrier which will be stationed 
nearby, or you could just go exploring. 
Using infinite manta weapons F6, gives
you an air superiority role - it is 
quite a sight to watch ten of your 
missiles track and kill an enemy 
aircraft. Not that this will mean that
you don't get shot down - the enemy 
aircraft are pretty mean fighters. With 
an unlimited number of mantas you can 
practise dog-fighting with lasers.
You could concentrate on practising 
bombing runs, or ground attack. The 
opportunities are endless. Careful 
choice of the options can make things 
just  bit  asier for you without
making things too easy. 

Hopefully, by using these cheat 
programs your enjoyment of the games 
will be increased. That is the 
intention. 
